Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the principles of pharmacokinetics. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Good morning. Let us begin with first principles.
What do we mean by pharmacokinetics, and how does it differ from pharmacodynamics?
Pharmacokinetics is the study of what the body does to a drug — the time course of
its absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion, often abbreviated ADME.
It describes how drug concentration changes with time in the plasma and at the site
of action.
Pharmacodynamics, by contrast, is what the drug does to the body — the relationship
between concentration and effect, mediated through receptors and other targets.
A useful way to hold the distinction is that pharmacokinetics gets the drug to the
receptor and pharmacodynamics is what happens once it arrives.
In anaesthesia the two are inseparable in practice:
when I titrate propofol I am exploiting kinetics to deliver a concentration and
dynamics to produce hypnosis, and target-controlled infusion is essentially applied
pharmacokinetics.
Take me through the routes of administration and the concept of bioavailability.
Drugs may be given by many routes — intravenous, oral, intramuscular, subcutaneous,
transdermal, inhalational, neuraxial, and so on.
Bioavailability is the fraction of an administered dose that reaches the systemic
circulation in an unchanged, active form.
By definition an intravenous drug has a bioavailability of one,
or one hundred per cent, because it is placed directly into the circulation.
For other routes bioavailability is less than one and depends on the completeness
of absorption and on first-pass metabolism.
The oral route is convenient but bioavailability is often reduced by incomplete
absorption across the gut and by extraction in the gut wall and liver before the
drug reaches the systemic circulation.
Bioavailability is quantified by comparing the area under the concentration-time
curve for the route in question with that after an intravenous dose.
You mention first-pass metabolism. Explain it and give an anaesthetic example.
First-pass metabolism, or pre-systemic metabolism,
is the metabolism of an orally administered drug during its first passage from the
gut through the portal circulation and the liver,
before it reaches the systemic circulation.
Blood draining the gut passes via the portal vein to the liver,
so a drug that is highly extracted by the liver may have a large fraction removed
on that first pass, dramatically reducing its oral bioavailability.
A classic example is glyceryl trinitrate,
which undergoes almost complete first-pass metabolism and is therefore given
sublingually or transdermally to bypass the portal circulation.
Morphine and propranolol also show substantial first-pass effect.
This is why the intravenous and oral doses of such drugs differ so markedly,
and why some drugs are simply not given orally.
Let us turn to distribution. Define the volume of distribution and explain what it
tells you.
The apparent volume of distribution is the theoretical volume into which a drug
would have to distribute to account for the plasma concentration measured,
assuming it were present throughout that volume at the same concentration as in
plasma.
It is calculated as the dose divided by the plasma concentration at time zero.
It is an apparent volume, not a real anatomical one — a highly lipophilic drug that
is extensively sequestered in tissue will have a very low plasma concentration and
therefore a very large, even physiologically impossible, volume of distribution,
sometimes hundreds of litres.
A drug confined to the plasma has a small volume of distribution,
close to the plasma volume. The value tells me how extensively a drug is
distributed beyond the circulation,
and it determines the loading dose required to achieve a target plasma
concentration.
What factors determine the volume of distribution?
The principal determinants are lipid solubility,
the degree of plasma protein and tissue binding,
the degree of ionisation at physiological pH, and the molecular size.
A small, lipophilic, un-ionised molecule that binds avidly to tissues will
distribute widely and have a large volume of distribution.
A large, polar, highly protein-bound molecule that cannot leave the circulation
will have a small volume.
Physiological factors matter too: body composition,
the proportion of fat and water, age, pregnancy,
oedema and the presence of effusions all alter distribution.
The volume of distribution is not fixed for a drug but varies between patients,
which is one reason doses must be individualised.
How does plasma protein binding influence pharmacokinetics?
Many drugs are bound to plasma proteins — acidic drugs largely to albumin,
basic drugs to alpha-one acid glycoprotein.
Only the free, unbound fraction is pharmacologically active and available to cross
membranes, act at receptors, and be metabolised or excreted.
Protein binding therefore acts as a reservoir and influences the free concentration.
Changes in binding matter most for highly bound drugs with a narrow therapeutic
index: hypoalbuminaemia, as in liver disease, malnutrition or critical illness,
increases the free fraction and can enhance effect or toxicity.
Displacement interactions, where one drug displaces another from binding sites,
can transiently raise the free concentration,
though the clinical importance is often overstated because the freed drug is also
more rapidly cleared.
Alpha-one acid glycoprotein is an acute-phase protein and rises in inflammation,
increasing the binding of basic drugs such as local anaesthetics.
Describe the compartment models used to characterise distribution.
Compartment models are mathematical abstractions that fit the observed
concentration-time data; they do not correspond to real anatomical spaces.
The simplest is a one-compartment model,
in which the drug is assumed to distribute instantaneously into a single well-mixed
volume and then decline by first-order elimination,
giving a single exponential decay.
A two-compartment model has a central compartment,
representing blood and the well-perfused organs,
and a peripheral compartment of less well-perfused tissue;
the plasma concentration after a bolus then shows a rapid distribution phase,
the alpha phase, followed by a slower elimination phase, the beta phase.
A three-compartment model adds a second, deep peripheral compartment,
typically poorly perfused fat, and is the model that best describes intravenous
anaesthetic agents such as propofol — a rapid initial fall by redistribution,
then progressively slower phases as drug returns from the peripheral compartments.
Define clearance and explain how it relates to the body's organs.
Clearance is the volume of plasma from which a drug is completely removed per unit
time; it has units of volume per time, such as millilitres per minute.
It is the single most important parameter governing the maintenance dose needed to
sustain a steady-state concentration.
Total body clearance is the sum of the clearances by each eliminating organ —
principally the liver and kidneys, but also, for some drugs, the lungs,
blood and tissues.
For propofol, for example, total clearance exceeds hepatic blood flow,
which tells us there must be significant extrahepatic metabolism.
Clearance is independent of concentration for a first-order drug,
meaning a constant fraction is removed per unit time, and it is clearance,
together with the volume of distribution, that determines the elimination half-life.
You raised hepatic clearance. Explain extraction ratio and the difference between
flow-limited and capacity-limited drugs.
The hepatic extraction ratio is the fraction of drug removed from the blood in a
single passage through the liver, ranging from zero to one.
For a drug with a high extraction ratio, close to one,
the liver removes almost all the drug presented to it,
so the clearance is limited by how much drug is delivered — that is,
by hepatic blood flow.
These are flow-limited or perfusion-limited drugs,
and their clearance falls when hepatic blood flow falls,
for example with the reduced cardiac output of anaesthesia or heart failure;
propofol and lidocaine behave this way.
For a drug with a low extraction ratio, the liver removes only a small fraction,
and clearance depends on the intrinsic metabolic capacity of the enzymes and on the
free fraction, not on blood flow — these are capacity-limited or enzyme-limited
drugs, and their clearance is sensitive to enzyme induction or inhibition and to
changes in protein binding.
Warfarin and phenytoin are examples.
Now half-life. Define it and give its relationship to volume of distribution and
clearance.
The elimination half-life is the time taken for the plasma concentration to fall by
half during the elimination phase. For a first-order process it is constant,
independent of concentration.
It is related to the other two parameters by the equation that half-life equals the
natural logarithm of two, about zero point six nine three,
multiplied by the volume of distribution and divided by clearance.
This relationship is important because it shows that half-life is a derived,
dependent variable: a long half-life may result from a large volume of
distribution, a low clearance, or both.
A drug can have a low clearance yet a short half-life if its volume of distribution
is small, and vice versa. Around four to five half-lives are required to reach
steady state on repeated dosing, and the same number to eliminate the drug once
stopped.
Distinguish first-order from zero-order kinetics,
and tell me where zero-order matters.
In first-order kinetics a constant fraction of the drug present is eliminated per
unit time, so the rate of elimination is proportional to the concentration;
the great majority of drugs at therapeutic concentrations behave this way,
and they have a constant half-life.
In zero-order kinetics a constant amount is eliminated per unit time,
irrespective of concentration, because the eliminating enzymes are saturated;
the rate is then maximal and fixed.
This is described by Michaelis-Menten kinetics,
where a drug shows first-order behaviour at low concentrations and zero-order
behaviour once the enzymes saturate.
The clinical importance is that for a drug showing saturation kinetics,
such as phenytoin, alcohol, or high-dose aspirin,
a small increase in dose can produce a disproportionately large and unpredictable
rise in concentration, because elimination cannot keep pace.
Such drugs do not have a constant half-life and are difficult to titrate safely.
Explain the concepts of loading dose and maintenance dose.
The loading dose is the dose required to achieve a desired target plasma
concentration rapidly, and it is determined by the volume of distribution:
the loading dose equals the target concentration multiplied by the volume of
distribution.
It fills the volume into which the drug distributes.
The maintenance dose is the dose required to replace what is eliminated and so
sustain the target concentration at steady state,
and it is determined by clearance: the maintenance dosing rate equals the target
concentration multiplied by clearance.
Recognising that loading depends on volume and maintenance on clearance is
fundamental — it explains, for instance,
why a patient with reduced clearance needs the same loading dose but a reduced
maintenance dose, and it underpins the way infusion regimens are constructed.
Define steady state and state how long it takes to reach.
Steady state is the condition in which the rate of drug administration equals the
rate of elimination, so that the average concentration remains constant over time.
With a constant infusion, or regular repeated dosing,
the concentration rises along an exponential curve towards the steady-state value,
reaching about ninety-four per cent after four half-lives and about ninety-seven
per cent after five; for practical purposes steady state is regarded as achieved
after four to five half-lives.
This is independent of the dose — the dose sets the height of the plateau,
not the time to reach it.
If a steady-state concentration is needed quickly,
a loading dose is given to fill the volume of distribution and reach the target at
once, after which the maintenance infusion holds it there.
Define context-sensitive half-time and explain why it differs from elimination
half-life.
The context-sensitive half-time is the time taken for the plasma concentration to
fall by fifty per cent after stopping a continuous infusion that has maintained a
constant concentration, where the context is the duration of the infusion.
It differs from the elimination half-life because it accounts for redistribution of
drug from the peripheral compartments back into the central compartment once the
infusion stops, not merely elimination.
For a multi-compartment drug the context-sensitive half-time generally lengthens
with infusion duration, because the peripheral compartments fill and then return
drug to the plasma, slowing the fall.
The shape of this relationship is what makes a drug suitable or unsuitable for
prolonged infusion: propofol has a relatively flat context-sensitive half-time,
whereas some opioids, such as fentanyl, show a steeply rising one.
It is a far better guide to recovery from an infusion than the elimination
half-life.
What is the effect-site, and what does the rate constant ke0 describe?
The effect-site, or biophase, is the notional compartment where the drug exerts its
effect — for an anaesthetic, the brain.
Because the drug must move from plasma to this site,
there is a delay between the plasma concentration and the effect,
seen as hysteresis on a concentration-effect plot.
The rate constant ke0 is the first-order constant describing equilibration between
the plasma and the effect-site; it determines how quickly the effect-site
concentration follows the plasma concentration,
and is often expressed as the time to peak effect or the blood-brain equilibration
half-time.
A drug with a fast ke0 equilibrates quickly and acts rapidly.
In effect-site target-controlled infusion the device deliberately overshoots the
plasma concentration to drive drug across this gradient and achieve the target
effect-site concentration sooner.
Let us return to absorption. How do ionisation and pKa influence a drug's behaviour?
Most drugs are weak acids or weak bases and exist in equilibrium between ionised
and un-ionised forms. Only the un-ionised,
lipid-soluble form crosses lipid membranes readily,
whereas the ionised form is water-soluble and trapped.
The pKa is the pH at which the drug is fifty per cent ionised,
and the ratio of ionised to un-ionised forms at any pH is given by the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. So the local pH and the drug's pKa together
determine how much is available to cross membranes.
This explains why aspirin, a weak acid,
is relatively un-ionised in the acidic stomach and can be absorbed there,
and why local anaesthetics, weak bases, are less effective in infected,
acidic tissue, where a greater proportion is ionised and unable to cross the nerve
membrane.
It also underlies ion trapping, for example of basic drugs in the more acidic fetal
circulation.
Describe the phases of drug metabolism.
Metabolism generally converts lipid-soluble drugs into more water-soluble
metabolites that can be excreted. It is conventionally divided into two phases.
Phase one reactions — oxidation, reduction and hydrolysis — introduce or unmask a
reactive functional group, often through the cytochrome P450 enzyme system;
they may produce active or even toxic metabolites.
Phase two reactions are conjugations,
in which the drug or its phase one metabolite is joined to an endogenous molecule
such as glucuronic acid, sulphate, or glutathione, generally producing an inactive,
highly water-soluble product for excretion.
Not all drugs undergo both phases, and some go straight to conjugation.
The cytochrome P450 system is the major site of drug interactions through enzyme
induction and inhibition, and genetic variation in these enzymes underlies much of
the individual variability in drug handling.
How are drugs excreted, and how does renal handling work?
The kidney is the principal organ of excretion for water-soluble drugs and
metabolites.
Renal handling involves three processes: glomerular filtration of unbound drug,
active tubular secretion of acids and bases by carrier systems in the proximal
tubule, and passive tubular reabsorption of lipid-soluble,
un-ionised drug along the tubule.
The net renal clearance is the sum of filtration and secretion minus reabsorption.
Because reabsorption depends on ionisation,
manipulating urinary pH can enhance elimination — alkalinising the urine increases
the ionised fraction of a weak acid such as aspirin and promotes its excretion.
Some drugs and metabolites are excreted in bile and may undergo enterohepatic
recirculation, prolonging their effect. Drugs excreted unchanged by the kidney,
such as many neuromuscular blocking agents and antibiotics,
accumulate in renal impairment and require dose adjustment.
How do you adjust your thinking in the elderly and at the extremes of age?
Age changes both kinetics and dynamics.
In the elderly, reduced lean body mass and total body water and increased fat alter
the volume of distribution; reduced hepatic blood flow and mass reduce clearance of
flow-limited drugs; and reduced renal function reduces clearance of renally
excreted drugs.
Plasma protein concentrations may fall. There is also increased pharmacodynamic
sensitivity, particularly to central depressants.
The combined effect is that doses should be reduced and titrated slowly.
Neonates differ in the opposite direction in some respects — immature hepatic
enzyme systems and renal function slow elimination,
a larger proportion of body water increases the volume of distribution of
water-soluble drugs, the blood-brain barrier is more permeable,
and protein binding is reduced.
Each of these demands careful, weight-appropriate and maturation-appropriate dosing.
And in hepatic and renal impairment?
In hepatic impairment the clearance of drugs metabolised by the liver is reduced,
more so for flow-limited drugs when there is portosystemic shunting or reduced
perfusion, and for capacity-limited drugs when synthetic function is impaired.
Reduced albumin raises the free fraction of highly bound drugs,
and reduced clotting factor synthesis matters for anticoagulants.
I would favour drugs with extrahepatic metabolism, such as atracurium,
eliminated by Hofmann degradation, and titrate carefully.
In renal impairment, drugs and active metabolites that depend on renal excretion
accumulate — morphine-six-glucuronide is a classic example,
prolonging opioid effect — so I would reduce doses, lengthen intervals,
and again prefer agents independent of renal elimination.
In both situations, increased sensitivity to central depressants compounds the
kinetic changes.
Finally, how does pregnancy and obesity alter pharmacokinetics?
Pregnancy increases plasma volume, cardiac output and total body water,
increasing the volume of distribution of water-soluble drugs; albumin falls,
raising free fractions; gastric emptying and motility change absorption;
and placental transfer must be considered, governed by lipid solubility,
ionisation, molecular size and protein binding.
Renal clearance rises with the increased glomerular filtration rate.
In obesity, the increased fat mass markedly increases the volume of distribution of
lipophilic drugs, prolonging their effect,
while lean body mass increases proportionally less;
this is why induction doses are often calculated on lean or adjusted body weight
rather than total body weight, to avoid overdose,
whereas some maintenance dosing uses an adjusted scalar.
Both states are reminders that the standard parameters are population averages and
that dosing must be individualised.
You mentioned area under the curve. How is bioavailability actually quantified,
and what is the difference between the rate and the extent of absorption?
Absolute bioavailability is quantified by giving the drug by the route in question
and intravenously on separate occasions,
and comparing the areas under the plasma concentration-time curves,
correcting for dose; the ratio of the oral to the intravenous area under the curve
gives the fraction reaching the systemic circulation.
The area under the curve reflects the extent of absorption — the total amount that
reaches the circulation. The rate of absorption is a separate property,
reflected in how quickly the peak concentration is reached and how high it is.
Two formulations may have the same extent of absorption,
and so the same area under the curve,
but very different rates — one producing a rapid high peak,
the other a slow low one.
Both matter clinically: the extent governs the average effect,
while the rate may govern the onset and the peak-related side-effects.
Describe the rate constants of a two-compartment model and the concept of the time
constant.
After a bolus into a two-compartment system the plasma concentration is described
by the sum of two exponential terms,
a rapid distribution phase characterised by the rate constant alpha and a slower
elimination phase characterised by the rate constant beta.
These macro-rate constants are composites of the underlying micro-rate constants
describing transfer between the central and peripheral compartments and elimination
from the central compartment.
A useful related idea is the time constant, the reciprocal of the rate constant,
which is the time that would be taken to complete a process were the initial rate
maintained; one time constant corresponds to a fall to about thirty-seven per cent
of the initial value, and a process is essentially complete after three to four
time constants.
The time constant is mathematically cleaner than the half-life and underlies the
exponential behaviour of wash-in and wash-out,
including the filling of a vaporiser circuit or the rise of end-tidal agent.
You earlier said recovery from a single dose is by redistribution.
Develop that idea.
Yes — for a lipophilic drug given as a bolus,
the rapid fall in plasma and brain concentration that ends the clinical effect is
due overwhelmingly to redistribution, not elimination.
The drug moves down its concentration gradient from the central compartment into
the well-perfused lean tissues and then the fat,
and the plasma concentration falls steeply during this distribution phase.
The patient wakes because the effect-site concentration has fallen below the
threshold, even though most of the administered drug is still in the body.
Only later, and far more slowly, is the drug actually eliminated.
This is why a single dose of thiopental or propofol is short-acting despite a long
elimination half-life, and why repeated doses or an infusion eventually saturate
the peripheral compartments, abolish the redistribution gradient,
and produce a cumulative, prolonged effect.
What is enterohepatic recirculation, and why does it matter?
Enterohepatic recirculation occurs when a drug or its conjugated metabolite is
excreted in the bile into the gut, where the conjugate may be hydrolysed by gut
bacteria back to the parent drug, which is then reabsorbed and returns to the liver.
The effect is to create a reservoir that prolongs the drug's presence in the body
and can produce a secondary peak in the plasma concentration-time curve.
It prolongs the half-life and the duration of effect of affected drugs.
It is also the reason that interrupting the cycle — for instance with oral
activated charcoal, or by the disruption of gut flora by antibiotics — can alter
drug handling, the latter being one proposed mechanism for the failure of the oral
contraceptive pill with concurrent antibiotics.
Give me some examples of active or toxic metabolites and their importance.
Several metabolites are pharmacologically important.
Morphine is metabolised to morphine-six-glucuronide,
which is itself an active opioid and accumulates in renal impairment,
prolonging and deepening the effect; and to morphine-three-glucuronide,
which is inactive at the opioid receptor but may be neuroexcitatory.
Pethidine is metabolised to norpethidine,
which is proconvulsant and accumulates with repeated dosing or renal impairment.
Diazepam has active metabolites including desmethyldiazepam, prolonging its effect.
Codeine is essentially a prodrug, requiring metabolism by a cytochrome enzyme to
morphine for its analgesic effect, so its efficacy depends on the patient's
metabolic phenotype.
The lesson is that I cannot consider the parent drug in isolation:
active metabolites may dominate the clinical picture,
especially when their elimination is impaired.
Explain enzyme induction and inhibition, with their time courses.
The cytochrome P450 enzymes can be induced or inhibited by other drugs,
altering the clearance of capacity-limited drugs.
Enzyme induction is an increase in enzyme quantity or activity,
typically through increased synthesis,
so it develops gradually over days to weeks and resolves slowly;
inducers such as the anticonvulsants,
rifampicin and chronic alcohol increase the metabolism of co-administered drugs,
reducing their effect, and can be hazardous when the inducer is withdrawn and
concentrations rise.
Enzyme inhibition is usually more rapid,
occurring within hours as the inhibitor competes for or binds the enzyme;
inhibitors such as erythromycin, the azole antifungals,
and grapefruit juice reduce metabolism and raise concentrations, risking toxicity.
The differing time courses are clinically important:
an interaction from inhibition appears quickly,
whereas one from induction is delayed and may be missed.
Tell me about the pharmacogenetics of plasma cholinesterase and suxamethonium.
Suxamethonium is normally rapidly hydrolysed by plasma cholinesterase,
also called butyrylcholinesterase, giving its brief action.
The enzyme is genetically variable: a number of abnormal alleles exist,
the commonest being the atypical, or dibucaine-resistant, variant.
Individuals homozygous for an abnormal allele hydrolyse suxamethonium very slowly
and experience a greatly prolonged block — suxamethonium apnoea — requiring
continued ventilation and sedation until the block recovers.
The phenotype is characterised in the laboratory by the dibucaine number,
the percentage inhibition of the enzyme by dibucaine:
a normal enzyme is inhibited around eighty per cent, the heterozygote intermediate,
and the homozygous atypical patient around twenty per cent.
Acquired causes of low activity — liver disease, pregnancy, malnutrition,
and certain drugs — also prolong the block.
This is the classic anaesthetic illustration of pharmacogenetic variation in
kinetics.
Are there drugs whose elimination is independent of organ function?
Why is that useful?
Yes, and they are valuable in organ failure.
Atracurium is eliminated substantially by Hofmann degradation, a spontaneous,
non-enzymatic breakdown at physiological temperature and pH,
and by ester hydrolysis, so its clearance does not depend on hepatic or renal
function; cisatracurium relies even more on Hofmann elimination.
Remifentanil is an ester metabolised by non-specific plasma and tissue esterases,
giving it an extremely short, organ-independent, context-insensitive offset.
The usefulness is obvious: in a patient with hepatic or renal failure these drugs
behave predictably and do not accumulate,
so they can be used without the dose adjustment that organ-dependent drugs require.
It is a neat demonstration that not all elimination is hepatic or renal,
and that route of elimination should guide drug choice in organ dysfunction.
What role do drug transporters play in pharmacokinetics?
Membrane transporter proteins actively move drugs across cell membranes and are
increasingly recognised as important.
P-glycoprotein, an efflux transporter,
pumps drugs out of cells — it is found in the gut wall, where it limits absorption;
in the blood-brain barrier, where it restricts central entry;
and in the renal and biliary excretory pathways.
Its activity can be induced or inhibited,
producing interactions analogous to those of the metabolising enzymes,
and genetic variation in it contributes to variability.
Other transporters, the organic anion and cation transporters in the kidney,
mediate active tubular secretion.
Transporters help explain phenomena that simple passive diffusion cannot,
such as why some drugs are kept out of the brain,
and they are a further site at which drug interactions and individual variation
arise.
When and why would you use therapeutic drug monitoring?
Therapeutic drug monitoring — measuring plasma concentrations to guide dosing — is
worthwhile for a drug that has a narrow therapeutic index,
a concentration that correlates with effect or toxicity better than the dose does,
marked interindividual variability in handling,
and no readily measurable clinical end-point.
Classic examples are the aminoglycoside antibiotics,
where both efficacy and toxicity are concentration-related; phenytoin,
with its saturation kinetics; digoxin; lithium; and the immunosuppressants.
It is not useful where the effect can simply be titrated and observed,
which is why we do not routinely measure plasma concentrations of anaesthetic
agents — we titrate to clinical effect and to depth monitoring instead.
Sampling timing matters: trough concentrations are usually taken for safety,
and the sample must be taken once distribution is complete and ideally at steady
state.
How should body size and maturation guide dosing, particularly in children?
Simple linear scaling of an adult dose by weight is often inaccurate,
because the physiological processes that determine clearance do not scale linearly
with weight.
Allometric scaling, using weight raised to a power of around three-quarters for
clearance, better reflects how metabolic processes vary with size,
and is incorporated into modern paediatric infusion models.
In neonates and infants, maturation must be considered as well as size,
because enzyme systems and renal function develop over the first months of life,
so clearance per kilogram changes with age.
The practical consequences are that small children often require a higher dose per
kilogram than adults for some drugs because of their proportionally larger
clearance and volume, while neonates require less because of immature elimination.
Dosing must therefore account for both size and maturity, not weight alone.
Pull it together: outline how the pharmacokinetic parameters guide the design of an
intravenous infusion regimen.
I would think in two steps.
To reach the target concentration quickly I give a loading dose calculated from the
volume of distribution — target concentration multiplied by volume — recognising
that for a multi-compartment drug the initial volume is small and the loading dose
fills the central compartment.
To sustain that concentration I run a maintenance infusion calculated from
clearance — target concentration multiplied by clearance — which replaces what is
eliminated.
Because the peripheral compartments fill over time,
a single fixed maintenance rate would cause the concentration to climb,
so a real regimen reduces the rate in steps, as in the ten-eight-six scheme,
or a target-controlled infusion does this automatically using the pharmacokinetic
model.
Recovery is then predicted not by the elimination half-life but by the
context-sensitive half-time. In short, volume sets the loading dose,
clearance sets the maintenance rate,
and the compartment structure dictates how the rate must change over time.
How do you estimate renal function for dosing, and how does it guide adjustment?
Renal drug handling is gauged from the glomerular filtration rate,
estimated rather than measured in practice.
The Cockcroft-Gault equation estimates creatinine clearance from age, weight,
sex and serum creatinine, and the modern estimated glomerular filtration rate
equations report a normalised value; each has limitations,
particularly at extremes of body size and muscle mass,
and in acute kidney injury where the creatinine lags behind the true function.
For a drug substantially eliminated unchanged by the kidney,
I reduce the dose or lengthen the interval in proportion to the reduction in
clearance, and I am especially cautious where active or toxic metabolites
accumulate, as with morphine.
I would also note that creatinine overestimates function in the elderly and the
cachectic, in whom reduced muscle mass produces a deceptively normal value despite
genuinely reduced clearance.
How do dosing interval and dose size affect the fluctuation around the steady-state
concentration?
At steady state the average concentration is fixed by the dosing rate and
clearance, but the size of the peaks and troughs around that average depends on the
relationship between the dosing interval and the half-life.
Giving a small dose frequently produces a smooth concentration with little
fluctuation; giving a large dose infrequently produces wide swings,
with high peaks that may be toxic and low troughs that may be subtherapeutic.
When the dosing interval is short relative to the half-life, fluctuation is small;
when it approaches or exceeds the half-life, fluctuation is large.
A continuous infusion is the limiting case of no fluctuation.
This is why drugs of narrow therapeutic index are often given by infusion or in
small frequent doses, and why the choice of regimen is not only about the average
concentration but about keeping the whole excursion within the therapeutic range.
Why does repeated bolus dosing of a lipophilic drug eventually behave so
differently from a single dose?
Because the redistribution that terminates a single dose depends on a concentration
gradient from the central to the peripheral compartments,
and that gradient disappears as the peripheral compartments fill.
The first dose is short-acting because drug floods out of the plasma into empty
tissue.
With repeated doses or an infusion,
the muscle and then the fat progressively load with drug;
once they are no longer able to take up more,
redistribution can no longer terminate the effect,
and the falling plasma concentration now depends on the much slower process of
elimination.
The drug therefore accumulates and its apparent duration of action lengthens
dramatically.
This is the kinetic basis of the cumulative hangover seen with repeated thiopental,
and the reason the context-sensitive half-time, not the single-dose behaviour,
must guide prolonged administration.
Summarise, then, how a sound grasp of kinetics prevents drug accumulation and harm.
Understanding kinetics lets me anticipate rather than react.
Knowing that loading depends on volume and maintenance on clearance,
I give the right initial dose and the right sustaining rate.
Knowing the extraction ratio, I predict which drugs will accumulate when hepatic
blood flow falls under anaesthesia. Knowing the route of elimination,
I choose organ-independent drugs in organ failure and reduce doses of those that
depend on a failing organ.
Knowing about active metabolites and saturation kinetics,
I avoid the traps of morphine-six-glucuronide in renal failure and of phenytoin's
non-linear behaviour. And knowing the context-sensitive half-time,
I predict recovery from an infusion realistically.
In every case the kinetic framework converts a list of facts into a prediction of
what the concentration will do over time, which is the essence of safe prescribing.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Pharmacokinetics is what the body does to the drug — absorption,
distribution, metabolism and excretion — while pharmacodynamics is what the drug
does to the body. 2.
Loading dose is governed by the volume of distribution;
maintenance dose is governed by clearance;
half-life is a derived parameter equal to 0.693 times volume divided by clearance.
Second, Hepatic clearance depends on the extraction ratio:
high-extraction drugs are flow-limited,
low-extraction drugs are capacity-limited and sensitive to enzyme induction or
inhibition.
Third, Context-sensitive half-time, not elimination half-life,
predicts recovery from an infusion,
because it accounts for redistribution from peripheral compartments.
Fourth, Ionisation and pKa, described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation,
govern membrane crossing, ion trapping,
and the manipulation of excretion through urinary pH.
Thank you. That concludes the station.